# Basic syntax

This chapter covers keywords and reserved words, identifier, variable, operator and flow control.

## Keywords and reserved words

### Keywords

Identifiers that used by Java for special purpose. For example, declaring data type with `class`, `interface`, `enum`,..., flow control keywords like `if`, `else`, `for`, `while`, ..., and access modifiers like `private`, `protected`, `public`. User defined program are not allowed to use those words as identifiers. Note that Java keywords are in lowercase. Keywords are currently in use while reserved words are those reserved for future use. A full list of keywords and reserved words see the official [documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/nutsandbolts/_keywords.html).

## Identifier

Identifier is a character string used to identify an entity, such as a variable, a class, a method etc. So they are basically names.

### Rule

These are the hard rules that a programmer must follow. Otherwise, compilation fails.

* Identifiers are made from `[a-zA-Z0-9]_$`
* Can't start with `[0-9]`
* Can't be keywords or reserved words
* Case sensitive
* Whitespace is not allowed

### Convention

These are the guidelines that are good to have. As a pragmatic programmer, follow them as hard rules.

* Use `CamelCase` for Classes, Interfaces
* Use `camelCase` for variables, methods
* Use lowercase for packages
* Use UPPERCASE for constants concatenated with `_`

## Variables

Variable is essentially an area in memory that stores data. A variable has a `type`, a `name`, and a `value`. The value of that area can vary within the range of the given type.

In Java, programmers must declare a variable before using it. Variables are accessed by their names. Each variable has a scope which is defined as a pair of embracing `{}`. The variable is not accessible out of its scope. Given a scope there can't be duplicate names. i.e. Can't have two variables sharing the same name.

Examples:

`int var` declares a variable named `var` of type `int`.

`var = 10;` changes the values of `var` to be `10`.

And we can do that together by `int var = 10;`

### More on types

There are two categories of types in Java: primitive types and reference type. For the sake of simplicity, there are 8 primitive types and others are reference types.

Primitive types:

* Integers
  * `short`
  * `int`
  * `long`
* Floats
  * `float`
  * `double`
* `char`
* `byte`
* `boolean`

Typical reference types include classes, interfaces and arrays.

The range of values that a type can represent varies from type ty type. `byte` < `short` < `int` < `long` < `float` < `double`. So when the operands are of different types, the lower capacity one will be automatically cast into the other one.
For example, if you add an `int` and a `float` the result is a `float`.

It worth noting that the rule doesn't apply among `char`, `short`, `byte`. In other words, any operator between them results in an `int`.

In some cases, we need to "cast" a larger type into a smaller one baring the loss of precision. The quickest example is that casting a `double` variable `d1` of value `1.1` into `int i1` by `i1 = (int) d1;`. Note that in this case `()` is the casting operator.

In Java, `boolean` are either `true` or `false`. Unlike in C/C++, none 0 values stand for true while 0 stands for false. After compiled into byte code, `true` becomes `1` and `false` becomes `0`. JVM will pick it up from there.

### String

As suggested by its full name, `java.lang.String` is a reference type and probably the most commonly used reference type. It worth a chapter by itself and we would have that in the later of this course. So, here we just point out that `+` between a String and a primitive type performs a concatenation. See the following example:

```java
class StringTest{

    public static void main(String[] args){
        
        char c = 'a';//97 'A': 65
        int num = 10;
        String str = "hello";
        System.out.println(c + num + str);//107hello
        System.out.println(c + str + num);//ahello10
        System.out.println(c + (num + str));//a10hello
        System.out.println((c + num) + str);//107hello
        System.out.println(str + num + c);//hello10a
        
    }
}
```

## Operators

### Arithmetic

### Comparison

### Flow control
